# Steven Wade's SNHU ePortfolio

## Introduction

My name is Steven Wade. I'm a husband, a father, and a software engineer - in that order. I have been programming professionally since 2007 and though I learned a lot over the years, in 2018 I decided to go back to school to earn my Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science. I set out to accomplish two goals: first to fill in the gaps in my professional career and secondly, to set an example for my children about the value of education. Now, at the end of my academic journey, I see that I am not the same person that I was when I started at Southern New Hampshire University (SNHU) nearly three years ago. As you, the reader, navigate this portfolio, you will see examples of growth, determination, maturation, and knowledge earned.

## Reflection

The Computer Science program at Southern New Hampshire University (SNHU) has been a life-changing and eye-opening experience for me personally, academically, and professionally. This was my second attempt at college and through it, I learned something - I am not the same person I was when I was 21 years old. In the time between school, I have built a career in software development, I have built a family, and I've been through personal and professional struggles. During my capstone course, I have had the opportunity to reflect on not only my time at SNHU and my progress through the program, but on my progress as an individual. There were times that I considered quitting SNHU, that I questioned my ability to handle the more complicated math classes or the time-intensive computer science courses, yet I persevered. I believe that perseverance is one of my greatest strengths, and my completion of this program is a testament to that. This strength is an asset professionally and I can move further into my career knowing that whatever I am presented with, that through hard work and determination, that I can be successful.

In addition to developing myself as a person throughout this program, I also developed new technical and soft skills, as well as strengthened the skills that I already had. In CS-310, Collaboration and Team Projects, I learned how to work within a team and perform constructive and objective code reviews while providing substantive feedback. In DAT-220, Fundamentals of Data Mining, I developed the project management and communication skills needed to interact with stakeholders and listen to their business needs and help manage their expectations. This was accomplished through an in-depth analysis report of customer demographics and sales earnings culminating in the presentation of various charts, graphs, and data-driven business recommendations. Working within the Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC) in CS-250 and learning the applications and uses of the Unified Modeling Language in IT-315, Object-Oriented Analysis and Design, provided me an opportunity to immediately apply those techniques at my job which saw an increase in my performance and efficiency as well as increased trust from my teammates and managers.

Coming into this program I already had over a decade of experience in programming, but I lacked knowledge in the fundamentals of data structures and algorithms. CS-260, Data Structures and Algorithms, gave me first-hand experience with common computer science data structures such as hash tables, binary search trees, and linked lists. I learned to develop algorithms specific to each data structure as well as common sorting algorithms that served as a base knowledge that could be adapted to a specific use case. I was able to use my skills in software engineering to translate and adapt these data structures and algorithms to another language as part of my CS-499, Computer Science Capstone final project. Within this program, I have learned to use a variety of databases such as MySQL, MongoDB, and SQLite. I learned the strengths and use-cases for each database system and though not covered together in a single course, I have enough exposure and experience with each to make an informed decision on when to use one over the other.

Lastly, I developed a skill that is one of the most important to have within the computer science field: security. In CS-405, Secure Coding, we learned about vulnerabilities at the lowest machine level, and we examined various common and potential attack vectors that we might encounter in our careers. I learned techniques to analyze and test for security vulnerabilities as well as methods to safeguard against attack and strengthen an application. Some of the most valuable lessons that I took away from this course were all of the outside components that go into coding securely such as the development of and adherence to a security policy. I took a lot more away from this class than I originally expected and I'm a better programmer for having participated in the course.

Each of these strengths serves as a piece to a broader puzzle. The reflective nature of the CS-499 capstone course has helped me to understand how they all fit together within my repertoire and increase my stock as a professional developer.

## Portfolio

The artifacts featured in my ePortfolio were each chosen for specific reasons. Each artifact is meant to showcase various skills that I have developed throughout this program - representing the versatility that an engineer must possess. The specific enhancements made were done so to challenge me technically and mentally. I wanted to see how much I could accomplish within each enhancement's one-week time frame.

Beginning with the first enhancement, Software Engineering/Design, I chose the final project from CS-260, Data Structures and Algorithms. The original project introduced me to common computer science data structures, so for the enhancement of this artifact, I wanted to translate these structures to another programming language. This demonstrates not only my understanding of these computer science concepts themselves but also demonstrates my versatility as a programmer in being able to adapt to different development environments and utilize the strengths of various programming languages.

The second enhanced artifact, Algorithms and Data Structure, is the final project from my IT-145, Foundation in Application Development, course. I selected this artifact because it is a command-line-based application that limits its usability for general users. To enhance this artifact, I wanted to push myself to build a desktop graphical user interface (GUI) for the program which I had never done before. I also wanted to employ some of the secure coding strategies that I learned in CS-405. Besides upgrading the user interface, this gave me a chance to introduce organized data structures and utilize common sorting algorithms to increase the efficiency of the application.

The final enhanced artifact, Databases, in my ePortfolio is based on the final analysis report from the DAT-220, Fundamentals of Data Mining, course. For this artifact, I took the scenario from DAT-220 one step further and imagined average sales managers or marketing individuals viewing the report data that I presented at the end of the original course and *how* they might want to view that data. Further developing the scenario, I fabricated a business need for the fictional version of the Bubba Gump Shrimp Company in which the company has hired a developer to build a web-based dashboard for the customer survey data that is accessible to anyone within the company. This scenario allowed me to utilize my skills in communicating with the stakeholders to translate the charts and graphs from the data analysis report into a web-based version utilizing a MongoDB database. The same charts presented in the report are now organized into separate interactive graphs where the data mining and analysis are done on the backend of the application - eliminating complexity and reducing the barrier of entry for the end business user.

Each artifact chosen, and the performed enhancements, is meant to showcase my technical versatility as a programmer, but also highlight the soft skills (communication, planning, testing) that I have learned and improved on while studying at SNHU. A software engineer can end up in a variety of places performing a multitude of tasks and in a field that is always changing and improving, it's important to have knowledge of and experience in various aspects of computer science. That is what this portfolio is meant to show. I am no longer just a web developer. My tool belt has expanded, and I am now a software engineer capable of building and working on desktop, web, and mobile applications. I can guide a project through the steps of the SDLC, driving it to completion, and delivering it to the stakeholders.